A Spatial Proteome of Paramecium tetraurelia
Timothy Licknack

Introduction:

There is no doubt that the expansion of the protein repertoire in Eukaryotes has led to a massive expansion in cell biological complexity. In no such organism is this more true than Paramecium tetraurelia, a member of the Paramecium aurelia spp. complex genetically resolved by Sonneborn (1975). P. tetraurelia is a ciliated protozoan with dimensions of roughly ~120um x ~40um. Like other Ciliates, it contains two types of nuclei: a somatic macronucleus (~15um in diameter) with ~800 copies of every chromosome and two germ-line micronuclei (~2um in diamter) which are transcriptionally silent except during sexual reproduction. Investigators into the molecular genetics of P. tetraurelia were intrigued to find multiple copy of typically single-copy genes in model Eukaryotes. Upon sequencing of its genome, nearly 40,000 protein-coding genes were identified from at least 3 whole-genome duplication events (Aury et al. ; McGrath et al. ). The evolutionary fate of these duplicate genes have been discussed elsewhere (), but very little effort has been put towards understanding how the proteome responded to this massive increase in protein variants.

While there has been gradual progress made in building a model of how this cell functions, the methods involved are typically low-throughput. To study protein presence and localization, investigators typically resort to creating GFP-fusion proteins (Hauser et al. 2000). Some remarkable discoveries from these efforts have led to the identification of expanded protein families whose WGD-paralogs-- called ohnologs from here out-- sometimes have wildly different localization patterns. For example, when Sehring et al. (2007) surveyed the localization patterns of a large family of actin paralogs and ohnologs, they found structures ranging from phagosomes, the oral apparatus, parasomal sacs, and the cell cortex itself being stained. This and other observations have led to increasing speculation that every large gene family with divergent sequence or expression patterns may be candidates for functionally diverging protein functions in the context of this large, complicated cell. This is not always the case, however, and examples like that of the SPT gene family with starkly different mRNA expression patterns have retained the same protein localization pattern (Gruchota et al. 2017). 

One ill-addressed issue in Paramecium cell biology is the notorious inconsistency of GFP-fusion proteins. This is well-known in Saccharomyces cereviscae which has had virtually every ORF in its genome subject to GFP-fusion and microscopic assay (Huh et al. 2003). When comparing libraries of N and C-terminal GFP fusions, only 57% of clearly localized proteins were assigned to the same compartment (Weil et al. 2018). In P. tetraurelia, ptSERCA proteins dual-localize to the alveolar sacs and ER when fused to GFP, but this alveolar localization is abolished if the GFP tag is placed in the major cytoplasmic loop (Hauser et al. 2000). While methods such as antibody staining are still widely used, there is a further need to develop tools which independently probe protein localization without relying on low-throughput and dubious molecular methods. 

In the last few decades, a growing field of organellar proteomics has led to rapid discovery of new resident proteins of nearly all cellular organelles in model eukaryotes (Mann 2020). There are a variety of methods which use wildly different ways to probe the sub-cellular proteome of a given organism or tissue-type (Christopher et al. 2021). However, the use of protein correlation profiling has taken off in popularity due to its lack of dependence on the ability to cleanly isolate an organelle of interest (Andersen et al. 2003; Foster et al. 2006). High confidence “marker proteins” are used to indicate the expected pattern of all proteins within its resident organelle, and different statistical and machine learning techniques can then classify unknown proteins based on the protein abundance distributions of the marker proteins themselves. 

Here, we combine cell fractionation with label-free quantitative proteomics in order to probe the localization patterns of thousands of proteins simultaneously. We use supervised and unsupervised learning algorithms to systematically assign thousands of unknown proteins to specific cellular compartments using hundreds of known resident proteins of those compartments. We then survey protein similarity profiles for every protein in our data-set in order to generate hypotheses about the existence of protein complexes and pathways. Finally, we look for evidence of divergence in protein localization profiles between ohnologs having arisen from 3 most recent WGD events. Together with accompanying bioinformatic tools, we provide a deep characterization of one of the largest eukaryotic proteomes in nature and a framework for investigators to use our data to make additional discoveries. 



Methods:
Cell Culturing
Cell Lysis and Fractionation
Mass Spectrometry Preparation and Analysis
Organelle Assignment
Protein Similarity Profiling


Results:
Figure 1. Graphical Abstract
Figure 2. Protein Clustering, Marker Proteins, and Classification
Figure 3. Genomic and Proteomic Comparison of Organelles
Figure 4. Evolutionary Enrichment of Ancestral Proteins by Organelle
Figure 5. Protein Similarity Profiling using Chi2-score and G-test
Figure 6. Gene Duplicate Divergence


Discussion:
